[Music]
[Applause]
somebody had reported the understanding
of the world never advanced in the eyes
of your trailer and I'm all Cardinal
there
Manila famous minute dad yeah once you
climb to the top of the pinnacle you
want to stay there
- see I think adido one way of looking
at the person consumed by having total
power is that at core this person is
very insecure and powerless
strong men who want to rule for life
have been the norm in the Arab world for
almost half a century men who either
seize power or were in the right place
at the right time
[Music]
October the 6th 1981 the assassination
of President Anwar Sadat
Egypt loses one autocrat who has run the
country for a decade and then gets
another who stays in power for 30 years
Mubarak came to power accident
it was an accident of history for one
thing said that appointed him as
vice-president there were other eligible
candidates at that time probably more
deserving than him but that was the
choice of of said that if they were
usually in the military I mean Mubarak
was head of the Air Force he was very
close to sit out when said that was it
NASA of course was military Colonel
Gaddafi of course was in the Libyan army
at the time the Royal Libyan Army's it
would have been there assad father had
been head of the Air Force these were
people who knew about power and weapons
and the use of power and of course you
know when they were junior officers they
could tell clearly whether there might
be an opening or not but they bided
their time they the principal of the
dictator before he's a dictator is to be
patient and they all were means Saddam
was patient he was deeply loyal to his
predecessor and did he summoned him to a
meeting and said it's over I'm taking
as I became as a result of military
conspiracy the military coup he led the
group to the small group of officers who
launched the coup on September the 1st
1969 with Saddam he someone who worked
very hard in the ranks of his political
party and in 1968 he led the coup
against the military regime at that time
and conquered power in Iraq if you look
at the case of well NASA had been
plotting for a long time so that had
been a spy for the Germans remember I
mean they were involved in the the dark
side of the world and they were not
stupid I mean I was about to I can think
of who are one of those in Yemen but
these are early dictators had
intelligence they had brains and they
played their game very carefully they
waited and waited and waited they had
patience were they deeply intellectual
no I mean one of the problems that all
the dictators had is that by and large
they didn't have a university degree
they didn't read I once asked did
Mubarak read and one of his advisers
said no but I think his intelligence
chief does
[Applause]
once a big theta acquires power he needs
to hold on to it an intelligent autocrat
is very much aware of the enemies he has
made in the process of getting to the
top each enemy or perceived enemy is a
potential challenger who must be
eliminated starting with those closest
to him this happened with with NASA NASA
came with like 9 or or 10 officers free
officers who have stayed with him before
he came to power and they have launched
the coup in 1952 with him and they
supported
during that time by 1970 when he passed
away out of these nine members of the
revolutionary council in age there were
only three who had remained beside him I
said that was one another typical
example is Casati he came with a group
of our officers around him and today he
doesn't have a single one
they are substituted by his sons
one leader which certainly captured
world attention was Saddam Hussein the
televised story of the very first
meeting of his senior officials he had
after he took over from his cousin and
became number one in in interact that
was a very interesting meeting there
about 200 people in his large auditorium
and he wanted to get rid of 21 people he
took one of those 21 arrested him and
his family and said to him I want you to
confess to the plot against me
it was not fun and instructed him that
unless you confess to this publicly not
only you but your family will be
tortured and executed
and he then went through in this this is
captured on video with him smoking a big
black cigar and smiling throughout the
entire 200 people in the auditorium
Achmed is he a conspirator no the person
would say he knew the list he was
supposed to pick out what about muffled
is he a conspirator yes at which point
two security goons would come down grab
him put them out of the audience used to
be
[Music]
we went through the entire 200 people no
one knew who was going to be selected
they knew there was no such plot and
we're greatly relieved when they weren't
selected and then the clincher he said
to them I praise you for your loyalty
and as a reward you will be able to
inform the 21 firing squads for the
enemies of the regime making them
complicit in innocence
I mean Saddam was definitely the
cruelest got her out
I think you see Saddam ruled his own
government by terror Hafez al-assad
ruled his government by saying I'm
faithful to you you must be faithful to
me he would say okay you're my minister
of foreign affairs and you will stay the
minister in other words you were safe in
your job most of the ministers I knew
under our side they were the same people
class the the ridiculous Ministry of
Defense he was at the same job for
decades and so they thought safe why
should they want to overthrow the
president they got one of the greatest
jobs they wanted they were close to
power little well paid they could
indulge in all kinds you know
economic practice it has I had faced a
revolt from that the late 70s onwards of
the Muslim brothers and they started
killing some of his closest associates
they eventually seized control of a town
hammer and started killing party members
there it was very arms instructor
insurrection and he sent in the troops
and the black spot of his career was
that really most of the casualties were
caused after the government had retaken
control of the town people were brought
down from the house and shot
so who had perhaps ten thousand
casualties perhaps more if you live in
Syria for example and you see what
happened in Lebanon with their civil war
you see what happened in Iraq the
destruction of a whole society and five
or six million either displaced or
attended refugees Syria a trooper to
receive a million and a half Iraqi
refugees then you are grateful for a
certain stability and you're prepared to
sacrifice some political freedoms for
that stability now the same I think it
applies in a number of Arab countries
when you have Wars people lone for
security and what these dictators said
was we can give you security its
stability or chaos that was their life
they'll use anything the corruption
economy travel religion - you know what
was very interesting about Mubarak for
example is that he would crush the
Islamists he'd tell the Americans I've
crushed Islamist you've got to keep on
supporting me and then he'd do a deal
with a Muslim Brotherhood so that some
of those opponents and then say to the
Americans look some of them are going to
Parliament this is dangerous
and the line was always it's them or us
but in many cases the The Dictator would
try and use the Islamists to secure his
own power
Coffee
umaa coffee by ignominy lolly is melted
Daffy is Magda Daffy Lahore Hosni lousy
as he consolidates his power by getting
rid of challenges instilling fear all
the while claiming to bring stability
The Dictator must be careful not to come
across as an absolute monster as much as
he needs to be feared
he hopes to be loved it's very
interesting how many of these leaders
consider themselves almost the father of
their of the country and these are not
just my people but my children this was
true with Mubarak it's true with Qaddafi
too
[Applause]
Gaddafi would say my people all love me
they will protect me I am Here I am here
so it's all about Qaddafi it's all about
that individual and
and his children owe him that Allegiance
[Music]
they infantilized their people this they
make their people into little children
and because they've got a state children
and you know and they give them if I go
to school misbehave you won't get beaten
or sent to the police station or torture
lebara saw himself as a father figure
not just for the Egyptians but for the
Arab world at large he saw himself as
the wise old man of the region he liked
it when younger Arab leaders came up to
him for advice and sought his opinions
and I think it made him feel that he was
more experienced than them and that he
was the wise man of the reach I think
we've seen an interesting example of
what happens to this kind of entitled
reasoning when things start to fall
apart and people rebelled as we have
been witnessing in Qadhafi and what
Qadhafi has done is take these people
off of the spectrum of his people my
people they all love me and anyone who
doesn't must be a an agent of al Qaeda
or the or the West because it's
inconceivable to Qaddafi to believe
otherwise
[Music]
for the maintenance of absolute power
absolute allegiance is essential that
your people should love you is a given
no leader rules a country he gets his
information from the individuals around
him and he executes his decisions
through the people around him and a
person can be psychologically in touch
with reality by psychological testing
but politically out of touch with
reality if he's surrounded by a group of
sycophants who are afraid for good
reason to criticize later and tell them
what he wants to hear rather than what
he needs to hear you come to believe
that only you can do it only you can
modernize your country only you can
bring it forward and nobody else can
tell you anything half his message for
example became rather remote from
everybody in Syria he didn't really take
advice he used to bark out orders on the
telephone often in the middle of the
night to his cabinet colleagues anyone
in any job who's told Oh superb one
everything you do is correct who are
amazed at your work I mean whether
you're in journalism television banking
economy anything you start to believe it
one of the attributes of power is not
just corrupt ability it is also a great
desire to be right and loved and of
course what happens is that they believe
that people love them just believing
that your people love you is not enough
you have to know and just in case their
professed love is not real it is best to
know what they are up to at all times
in a dictatorship in the Middle East
everyone has to survey on each other
that's part of the deal so what did you
learn today about the Mahabharat working
at the interior ministry you've got to
answer that the president wouldn't ask
you this his own Mahabharat book yeah
and and of course they collect huge
doses massive doses in which they could
check out each answer and see if it made
sense obviously the worst of this was
sit out Ben Ali did it all the time but
only had they say that Ben Ali had about
78 80 percent of the population working
for his various Mahabharat organisations
which means that when the revolution
came of course as many of them must have
been Mahabharat men and women it is
necessary to have multiple separate
conflicting security agencies Hosni
Mubarak's Egypt is an example state
security controlled opposition groups
central security took care of government
buildings embassies and public events
military intelligence was responsible
for national security both inside and
outside Egypt's borders not one of these
agencies was on good terms with any of
the others they all reported directly to
the president reason for surveillance is
to sniff out enemies people who are not
loyal to you and might might be plotting
against you I don't consider Mubarak as
in the same psychological class as
Saddam or
or Qaddafi by any means rather he's an
authoritarian personality came from the
military but I consider him must much
psychologically healthier than some of
these really extremely insecure and
arrogant dictators who have to sniff out
danger at any cost and are actively
carrying out surveillance at all times
to find out who is against them who was
betraying them and Saddam was a
wonderfully popular man he won I think
ninety-nine point seven percent in the
last election he ran in and was
concerned to find out who that missing
0.3 percent was the Minister of Interior
its main job is to keep the dictator in
power that is the job that is the
Mahabharat that is the security services
I mean there's all kinds of security
services around it it was very
interesting for example in Cairo the
interior ministry in central Cairo
did a lot of torturing in Damascus the
torture was carried out in the Minister
of Interior which was just near the old
Damascus railway line it was built by
the East Germans here you had the former
Soviet bloc building the interior
ministry and then the Americans are
sending off their prisoners to be
tortured in them with Qaddafi for
example some fifteen or twenty percent
of this so-called the people's
committees are devoted to
counterintelligence and spying on fellow
Libyan citizens
and that creates such a painful climate
where people can no longer trust their
neighbors their friends might be a
government informant and it creates a
very paralyzing climate I've often
interviewed some of these dictators and
I usually say to them look these human
rights activists which you put in jail
are more dangerous to you in jail margin
jail and they inevitably say to me oh
but my security chiefs tell me that I've
got to be careful in such an environment
the security services inevitably become
powerful and so the the leaders the
political leaders are really into some
extent enslaved by their security chiefs
the problem for every autocrats is the
same with all the scent stifled everyone
around him becomes a sycophant in fear
of their lives as a result the autocrat
risks the ignorance that comes with
isolation
they have the political power they have
the economic power and and thus they
begin to act like a separate social
category above everyone else in society
a royalty and so most of these
Republic's that have emerged turned
gradually into a kind of royalties in in
which there is no inhibition anymore on
the way they act and the way they
conduct themselves these are the others
in their own society and they developed
that sense of associating with the with
the powerful and rich in the world you
know I remember during said that time
when he would refer to Henry Kissinger
as his friend my friend Henry you know
he's now on par with with the rich and
powerful in the world and they try to
associate with European royalties and
powerful and wealthy people abroad and
so be they become completely divorced
from the realities
mukarat
I know my level had original raised
raisaheb ooh just about who the mammon
eyes in yoga be shared Clara lay a smile
ethical a dictators public image is of
paramount importance to his people he
must be the ideal Superman always young
always healthy always impeccably dressed
something his people may aspire to be
but can never achieve hip racism isn't
greek word originally and it's come to
mean in English someone who thinks that
they're as good as a god someone who
thinks that there is powerful
importantly cigars someone who thinks
see maybe these people think they'll
never die Mubarak with his his hair
always black you know I used to go into
the hotel marriott and so tell me do you
have any father's address you know
[Music]
mr. schary how early if you watch either
with roulette resin we were sure arson
does investor class one consumer 10 ok
pattern Willoughby had been Mukesh bhai
corolla well be Mukesh whatever happy at
the back edge where you can shoot OPM
Estacado mostashari lahardee weaker than
any star valley and let there is an
awesome flora leslie ministers of
holography browser of the other scenario
is Alicia Attila can it be to share
physical walk very stubborn his way
ahead there is well secured in the
Connecticut Rashad the terminal ballot
we were to determine Bell Bella Felicia
Felicia an American resume as soon we
were killed of swimmable sceptile Isis
in no MFE Abbas who had fought here on
federal body element a scene has a
little head with Lincoln he like to
appear younger than his years not one
gray hair for an 82 year old man is
rather odd he took great care of his
appearance and the way he dressed and
his suits were always very expensive he
liked to look good
condemning Gaza they may attack they
matter a professor firkin young but
young felon Leonor do not tell a man
trouble dilemma canvas honeymoon would
allow any sayyidna the ahadith hug the
Haditha column robbers or kumuda gay I
mean how in harbin be folk rock band and
walk around of authority in order to had
this man when you eat candy man who know
where if the Yanni Sally Sheila robber
in the wool penny at wor Elba Naomie
vegetable nada para boom fisherman Arava
a banana be set for Sharad another day
is why famous wife with you know I
thought despite it when the hiya hatta
I'll see about the cursor abortions part
of narcissism is extreme vanity and
vanity about appearance is is a part of
that and bow and vanity about one's
possessions one certainly saw that with
with Saddam somewhat different with the
rather idiosyncratic Qaddafi
who dresses in a very peculiar manner he
also has done these rather strange
things he has a bodyguard of forty
Amazonian women
and had Ukrainian nurses who took cared
for his every need so there's something
about a a thirst the hunger for for
admiration for nurturing for for for
caring for support that goes into every
aspect of life for these individuals
[Music]
no self-respecting dictator can be
without a palace or preferably several
palaces and the more marble the better
the most effective symbolic tool of
representing power of creating
intimidation is scale make things very
very big indeed there are a lot of
secondary bits of advice about how you
you endorse that message of various
other levels but a place that's very
very big says I can command a lot of
land a lot of builders and I'm a very
big person the universal style of
dictatorship is showing off it's called
what a lot I got because you have to
communicate all that very fast saddam
actually he was fascinated by the
russian revolution there's a wonderful
story that Seberg Montefiore a barber
four-star hotels that he was visiting
all Stalin's palaces the author was
monty feel to see where stalin lived and
where he was going and so and they were
pretty dead empty oh darling was long
gone and there was this nice lady who
would show him around
and in each palace and each one would
say you know there was this very nice
arab gentleman who came not long ago to
have a look at the palace you see what
had happened of course is that the sedan
had gone round all Stalin's palaces to
see how he wanted to model his own this
was complete a derivative style and of
course you've got to realise that to
Crete where Saddam was born was from
he's only about five to six hundred
miles from Georgia which is where Stalin
was from big public spaces
are the things they want to copy when
they've got some money because these
influences happen when they haven't got
any money and they spend quite a lot of
time in hotels it's you know that's the
one
smart place often that there was in the
1970s when these ideas were getting
developed and they spent a lot of time
in hotels plotting them so naturally
they would think this is the Sheraton
Dubai 1975 it is the Acme of rich
civilized taste in order to avoid the
reverse effect
that the owner might look a bit lost in
all this you employ all sorts of tricks
you make sure that when he is seen or
photographed he's surrounded by a set of
symbols or people or something like that
so that he isn't just a tiny figure lost
in the place and you reproduce the tiny
or medium-sized owner on the walls in
form of terrifying over scale or
menacing looking pictures of himself
there was actually a Saddam's school of
art where they learned to paint him in
the different visages of his many rows
that I'm the sportsman Saddam the
athlete Saddam the benevolent father
Saddam the general Saddam the Statesman
and the everywhere you looked there were
pictures of him giant statues of him
[Music]
absolute power requires absolute control
of all media newspapers and television
must be controlled to within an inch of
their lives if possible the internet
must be censored as well which I didn't
get high heads of news channels and news
sector chiefs were always getting
directives from one source or the other
either directly from the presidency or
from the Minister of Information and
often from the interior ministry as we
saw happen during the revolution you
could not have a theater you could not
have a book published I could not have a
newspaper published unless the top man
without a ground unless he approved I
think you got Rose at the state media
was it wasn't about booth it was it was
preposterous you know you always open
your copy of ala ROM and there would be
more Barack on the front doing something
wonderful making a huge speech telling
people he's going to improve the song
but the amazing thing was that you'd
meet people in Cairo educated people who
read a problem because he believed it
you see Athens or because they wanted to
believe it this is part of the
infantilization of a society and you
would meet the journalist occasionally
and they were had no idea of the kind of
journalism that we ought to do you
couldn't criticize the President himself
nor the Armed Forces
now that was care also we couldn't
criticize the police
so these were the red lines other than
that we were free except that people did
exercise self-censorship a lot living
under repression for so long they had
this inherent fear and I remember one
incident when the Haiti earthquake
happened of course that was the top news
story around the world but on Egyptian
state television the top story was a
conversation a telephone conversation
between Mubarak and President Abbas
[Music]
having seized power then having secured
himself in power but knowing he is not
immortal the dictator must turn his mind
to who will succeed him the obvious
answer has to be one of his sons all of
us with the waning of days and the
impact of illness and age are faced with
facing the end of our hard our days that
there are ambitions not achieved
experience has not had but this is
unthinkable for the autocrat and we have
seen a number of individuals as they
were facing the end of their years make
extreme kind of kind of actions but one
saving grace would be if you could pass
on your kingdom to the prince
I found fascinating with Saddam who had
two sons of Uday and Qusay and that
rather than take his his sons to soccer
games he would take them to torture
sessions and I found that a remarkable
thing to do one of my mottos was the
family that slaves together stays
together the idea that the son should
take over from the father in republics
is a relatively recent idea and it's not
very popular with the populous in Syria
the son was groomed and took over then
of course in the other countries the
other Republican country didn't really
it happen as you know who black would
have liked his son today well it hasn't
happened I would say also in Yemen Sally
I would have liked his son to play
around but again it hasn't happened
people started actually talking about
inheriting the entire country and the
millions of people to their sons it's as
though you have a flock of sheep in
Syria President Hafez Assad had a rather
robust sunken vessel that he was being
groomed for the succession but he died
in a car accident in 1994 and so Bashar
was then studying ophthalmology in
London was hurriedly brought back to dr.
Syria and put through a rapid course in
the army and then governments and so
forth and still he was very young and
when his father died in 2000 so they had
to changed the Constitution which said
that some had to be four years old to be
president and to allow him to become
president at 34 not everybody was very
pleased and then the Vice President who
served after asking for many many years
Adam was particularly miffed and he
moved to opposition shortly afterwards
Qaddafi's
son are safe had a PhD from the London
School of Economics so there was some
hope that this was a more moderate man
more civilized men however just as
qaddafi was was was saying I'll go down
to the last drop of my blood his his son
was saying we'll go down to the last
bullet and in the end blood will out not
on her belly at the F Samir's at the
turkey and get to God if you are his
sons whom before were young children he
could tell them what to do and they
would listen but now they themselves
have become beneficiaries of the system
they've become icons of the system
they're now looking forward to
themselves being leaders of the system
after their father is gone it's always
very difficult not to step into the
shoes of a very powerful father as later
what's particularly difficult is to is
it when is when your father was was a
god-like figure as history religious
history teaches us being the son of God
is a dangerous occupation
[Music]
Oh
the problem for so many dictators is
that the people have a tendency to be
ungrateful they want freedom control
over their own lives and release from
the shackles of a police state and then
there comes a point where so much has
been taken from the people that they no
longer have anything more to lose
unfortunately many of those leaders
considered their people as liabilities
as burdens and they treated them as such
it was as though the leader was doing
the population a favor by letting them
live or by letting them you know work in
easly jobs and get paid for pennies the
the dynamics of power were totally wrong
rather than the leader being a public
servant held accountable by the
population it was as though the
population owned you know a favor or a
debt to the leader for allowing them to
exist
firstly Mubarak when he came to power he
spoke and he said things that if you
were to compare to what he has done
it's just absolutely shocking he was
talking about being on the side of the
poor being against the rich he was
talking about not allowing those amongst
the leading caliber to take more than
they deserve he was going to make
absolutely sure everyone in government
had their pennies counted the courts of
law to be totally independent the
security forces to be investigated
you're reading a beautiful speech where
is that person from where he ended every
single paragraph every single line he
pledged we're going to be about his law
he revoked he talked about how never
ever would a ruler be allowed to give
favorable access to his children so that
they would inherit him everything that
he promised he went against
he thought he had managed her
infantilizes people you know they've
been given fake newspapers fake
governments fake ministers fake
elections of course and in the end I
think what happened because of changes
in society in the world is that people
grew up only to discover them it was
their governments who were children one
of whom in Egypt was 83 years old and I
think that that's that's the moment when
it all crumbles we think it's going to
happen right now we're watching state
television here now who are running
their titles with president Mohamed
Hosni Mubarak has decided to waive the
office of the President of the Republic
and instructed the Supreme Council of
the Armed Forces to run the affairs of
the country may God guide our steps
[Applause]
listen to that crowd that's what they've
been waiting for Hosni Mubarak has done
alarum hello man tora tora what they
could have done differently lots of
things but could they have them anything
different I think their background the
way they were sucked into an atmosphere
in which hypocrisy over when them I mean
let's face it many of them come from a
coercive institution in society from the
institution of the arm which is trained
on obeying orders and following
discipline and accepting without
argument and so they expect off the
society to act in the same way
[Music]
[Applause]
one of the things that's awfully
important as one considers the lifelong
trajectory of dictators is too early
recognize who may be falling into this
pattern and not looking the other way
when these crimes occurred but he who
looks away from evil is a participant in
evil and after all Saddam Hussein was
supported by the United States earlier
on now because of our concern for the
Iranian and dangers if we see
individuals and we can understand that
they have the makings of this individual
we don't want to really increase their
their self love and adoration and their
and their own dreams of glory because we
may be giving birth to a monster